Links: [[Biology]] [[Neurobiology]]

An engram is a unit of cognitive information inside the brain, theorized to be the means by which memories are stored as biophysical or biochemical changes in the brain (and other neural tissue) in response to external stimuli.

The exact mechanism and location of neurologically defined engrams has been a focus of persistent research for many decades.The term “engram” was coined by memory researcher [[Richard Semon]] in reference to the physical substrate of memory in the brain. One of the first ventures on identifying the location of a memory in the brain was undertaken by Karl S. Lashley who removed portions of the brain in rodents. In Lashley's experiments, rats were trained to run through a maze and then tissue was removed from their cerebral cortex. Increasing the amount of tissue removed increased the degradation of memory, but more remarkably, where the tissue was removed from made no difference. His search thus proved unsuccessful, and his conclusion – that memory is diffusely distributed in the brain – became widely influential. However, today we appreciate that memory is not completely but only largely distributed in the brain; this, together with its dynamic nature makes engrams challenging to identify using traditional scientific methods.

Later, Richard F. Thompson sought the engram in the cerebellum, rather than the cerebral cortex. He used classical conditioning of the eyelid response in rabbits in search of the engram. He puffed air upon the cornea of the eye and paired it with a tone. After a number of experiences associating it with a tone, the rabbits became conditioned to blink when they heard the tone even without a puff. One region that Thompson's group studied was the lateral interpositus nucleus (LIP). When it was deactivated chemically, the conditioned response disappeared; when re-activated, they responded again, demonstrating that the LIP is a key element of the engram for this response. This approach, targeting the cerebellum, though successful, examines only basic, automatic responses, which virtually all animals possess. However, engrams of specific types of memory are found in the subsystems mediating that learning process and as such solely engrams of simple conditioning are associated with the LIP but not, for instance, engrams of semantic memory.